---
layout: post
title: "On choice"
date: 2021-07-24
---

In my conversations with others on free will, a difference in underlying semantics of *choice* often surfaces, which makes it hard to 
have a productive dialogue. For example, the phrase

- Claire **chose** to go to UC San Diego for medical school.

has two interpretations. In the free will case, **choice** implies that there is an immaterial agent or soul inside of Claire that 
chose from a platter of medical schools without any external influence. However, what I mean by **choice** is simply descriptive in nature. As a 
matter of describing Claire's actions, the word choice is appropriate. I could have easily substituted **went** for **chose to go**, but the difference is subtle 
and may still not be clear. The word **choice** is often used to describe scenarios when humans *appear* to be choosing from a platter of options, 
when in reality they are simply unaware of the prior causes in action yet to make that *choice*. The word *choice* can be reduced to describing an
instance where *subjectively* it feels like we're weighing different options, but in reality we're just blinded from the mechanisms in action 
that will ultimately make the *choice*. 

We can think of this experience as two abstract layers of choice. The outer layer is what most people experience and gives 
them the feeling of agency. They are deliberating for some time and all of a sudden, they feel compelled to make a choice that they believe they
came to on their own. The deeper layer is the actual, objective layer where the choice actually occurs. This is the layer where the brain is making predictions and calculations that remain outside of awareness. Eventually, the result of our brain's *choice* surfaces to our awareness, and it becomes *our* choice. The illusion of free will is when confuse the *choice* in the outer layer and the *choice* in the deeper layer. However, in meditation you can learn to observe the diffusion of the *choice* from the deeper layer to the outer layer of awareness, and recognize that you have absolutely no influence in the mechanisms leading to the final choice before it ever reaches our awareness.
