---
layout: post
title: "What love is not"
date: 2021-07-22
---

This short story is inspired by [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SGkgmU9vG_o&list=LL&index=8) and does a much better job
of illustrating the lunacy and overall fucked-upness of Christian love.

> “He commanded Adam not to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil; to disobey could not be a sin, because Adam could not comprehend a sin until the eating of the fruit should reveal to him the difference between right and wrong. So, he was unfair in punishing Adam for doing 
wrong when he could not know it was wrong.” -Mark Twain

“Eve, my darling, I’m going to the store real quick. Please watch your brother while I’m gone. And don’t forget: 
don’t eat the chocolate on the counter! I love you,” Yahweh says to his adopted 10 year old daughter. Shortly after her father left, 
Eve found herself being pulled closer to the edge of the counter where the chocolate lived. The family cat, Lucifer, joined Eve in her 
journey to the counter. Upon arriving at the edge, Eve’s bright green eyes hovering inches over the countertop, rested on the chocolate 
after scanning the landscape of the counter. While just out of reach for Eve, Lucifer slinked over to the alluring glob of butter and 
sugar in his own bout of curiosity. After briefly examining the chocolate, Lucifer, being a cat, smacked the chocolate bar off of the 
counter for virtually no reason and onto the floor where Eve swiftly scooped up the chocolate so as to not let Lucifer steal her opportunity
of gluttony. Her father’s warning to abstain from the chocolate was sitting helplessly in the back of her adolescent mind when bowled 
over by a gust of wind from the unstoppable rush of the thought to eat the chocolate. After taking a bite of the chocolate, Adam, 
her adopted brother, turned the corner and witnessed his sister’s crime. She soothed his worried shouts of protest by reminding him 
that they haven’t had dessert yet today and that Dad won’t mind. Eve’s convincing had made Adam hungry. Noticing his fixation on the 
chocolate, Eve offered her brother a bite, and he reluctantly accepted. After the siblings had finished their forbidden treat, 
they disposed of the evidence by cleverly placing the wrapper on top of all the trash in the trash bin. The closing of the trash bin 
lid was followed by the closing of the front door. The children turned their heads and were greeted by the looming presence of their 
father. “Why have you done this?” Yahweh exclaimed to his developing children prone to making mistakes. Being the just and merciful father, 
Yahweh forced his children out of the home and built a shed in the backyard for his children to live as he saw that to be a fitting punishment. 

20 years later, the adopted and genetically unrelated siblings had a child named Jesus. One day, while babysitting his grandchild, 
Yahweh, seeing his opportunity to rectify the chocolate incident with his children, decided to place Jesus in a concrete room in the 
basement after thoroughly spanking him and abusing him to the point of drawing blood. After three days, Jesus was rushed to the hospital, 
but was never seen again. Another 20 years pass, and Yahweh buys an orphanage out of his unending love for children and desire to amend 
his fathering mistakes with Adam and Eve. He commands all of the teachers and caretakers at the orphanage that the children must apologize 
to Yahweh daily (preferably constantly throughout the day) on behalf of Adam and Eve eating the chocolate 40 years ago. If a child refuses,
they are to never escape the orphanage and be tortured ceaselessly until they grow old and die. Yahweh reassured the caretakers that he 
loved the children very much and for this reason, no child should ever need to be punished because he already punished Jesus. Once the children discover how much Yahweh loves them, they will want to apologize to him and thank Jesus endlessly for taking their punishment for Eve eating the 
chocolate.
