---
layout: post
title: "Caffeine is still cool"
---

It seems like the low hanging fruit if you're a youtuber nowadays is to attack caffeine and publicly cry about how it's 
ruined your life and to convince everyone else it's ruining their life too. Well, I'm here to briefly defend our beloved chemical against some
monetized retardation. Here are two simple rules if you don't want caffeine to derail you. 

1. Drink coffee **after** your first meal

  - Your corticol levels peak in the morning in effort to wake your sorry ass up. If you then immediately 
  slam your adrenal glands with coffee (which also increase cortisol), you just bought a one-way ticket to panic attack city, which will 
  inevitably be followed by a crash. 
  - After digesting your first meal, your cortisol begins to chill out and stabilize. For most people, this time is around 9:30am - 11:00am. This will be the 
  sweet spot for sucking down your brown nectar. 
  
2. Get 2 hours of deep sleep every night

  - The main reason coffee fucks with people is because it fucks with their sleep. You have no idea what you're missing if you're not getting 8 hours of consistent
sleep. It's not just the lack of sleep is catastrophic for you, but adequate sleep is quite literally the most sustainable performancing enhancing drug we have. Anyways,
there is plenty out there to read on sleep already, so I won't do that here. Just know how much your life could be better if you slept consistently. 

- Back to the chemical: People underestimate the half-life of caffeine and naively drink coffee late into the evening. If you ingest 100mg of caffeine at 6pm, 50mg of caffeine will still be cock-blocking adenosine at midnight. Matt Walker's advised cutoff is 2pm. However, the variance of 
caffeine metabolization across humans is significant. Therefore, if you can drink caffeine late in the day and still get 2 hours of deep sleep, then more power to
you.

### Bottom Line

As with most drugs, they get shit on because people don't respect them nor they understand the science behind them. Caffeine is no different. 
