---
layout: post
title: "Not so intelligent design"
date: 2021-07-26
---

I'm not going to reinvent the wheel of counterarguing intelligent design because that is already sufficiently articulated. The most common satirical 
rhetort to intelligent design is that the biological designs we observe are most certainly not designed intelligently. We don't need to look any further
than the haphazard anatomical structure of the human body: fucked up spines and knees, pushing another human through a tiny pelvis, and a dangling, 
exposed nutsack to [name a few](https://getpocket.com/explore/item/top-10-design-flaws-in-the-human-body). In my brief googling, I noticed
an [Answers in Genesis](https://answersingenesis.org/human-body/is-human-body-bad-design/) post that commented on this
(no pun-intended) god-awful design of the human body: "But are these really “flaws”?". The article continues to conveniently provide unsatisfactory, and 
almost comical rationalizations that you can read for yourself. 

My argument in this post takes a slightly different perspective than the traditional dismantlings of ID. I posit that the "Intelligent Design" argument is simply a manifestation of [survivorship bias](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Survivorship_bias) (in addition to the 
non-existent to poor understanding of evolution). The problem with ID is that our brains can't even possibly conceive of the most intelligent design for 
the sustainment and proliferation of life. We are biased and limited in our observations from the results of evolution (evolution does NOT produce the best designs; natural selection
is a greedy algorithm; it produces the cheapest functioning designs in the short-term with no regard for future performance). What I'm trying to say is that 
**the optimal structure for life exists, but it will always be impossible for us to know its design.** Proponents of ID look at us and say "Wow, we're so complex! This has to be the best God can do!" and then pack
up and go home with no thought to *what could be*. 

However, if there did exist an omnisicent being somewhere out there, he/she/they would most certainly
know, and would be able to break free from the shackles of a crude process like natural selection. If mere humans can identify a myriad of flaws in only 1 (your most treasured nonetheless) of your 1 trillion designs, then perhaps 
omniscience is off the table. 

**A brief tangent**: if there the simulation argument were true, maybe there are super-beings outside of this computer that we call reality
running millions of simulations of natural selection in effort to find a global optimum for life and intelligence, and we're living in just one iteration...
