---
layout: post
title: "What is love"
---

Can love exist without free will? Is love without free will less pure than love with free will? These are two questions I think
have fairly straightforward answers: yes and no, respectively.

**Can love exist without free will?**

1. [We observe that humans do not have free will.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Sapolsky)
2. [We observe that humans experience love.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biological_basis_of_love)

Problem solved.

**Is love without free will less pure than love with free will?**

Technically, we would not even know what love with free will would even be like because we've only ever known what love is without free will (whether or not you have payed close enough attention to your deterministic brain). 
If you're reading this and are thinking to yourself "well I believe in free will, and I know what love is like". Stop right now and think
of someone you love dearly. It could be a child, a parent, a lover, or a friend. Now I want you in this moment to hate them as much as you can.
Try to get to the point where you want to kill them. Ok, ok now stop, and start loving them again. Now again, start hating them. Ok, back to loving.
Hmm, that's a little hard isn't it. It's almost as if you don't have a choice between hating them and loving them. It's as if you just love them and that's it. 

Love is not tainted in the absence of free will. The experience of love is still pure even if we don't have a choice in the matter. If I forced
you to eat your favorite food, let's say pizza, without your awareness of my involvement (let's say via some remote neurolink) would you suddenly not like pizza as much if you had just chosen to eat yourself without my intervention? 
No, of course not. You're still going to like pizza whether or not I forced you to eat it. Just because you're not aware of the prior causes
of your love for someone, doesn't mean you don't love them or you would love them *more* without prior causes. Again, it's hard to imagine
a scenario of loving someone without prior causes because our physical world consists only of physical process and prior causes.

Somewhere along our evolutionary timeline, some *homo sapiens* started mutually loving each other a little more than 
their non-loving *homo sapiens* counterparts and the loving *homo sapiens* just happened to survive long enough to reproduce slightly more 
prolifically than the non-loving *homo sapiens* and now we have ["The Notebook"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Notebook) and ["Thinkin' Bout You"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thinkin_Bout_You_(Frank_Ocean_song)).
Note that I'm not an evolutionary biologist and love (which could be loosely defined as a myriad of chemcial processes) very likely evolved before *homo sapiens* in a much more complex sequence of mutations and selections.

