---
layout: default
title: "100 Days of Analysis - 005"
subtitle: "2.1.4 - Real Analysis: Royden"
mathjax: true
comments: true
date: 2024-05-01
published: true
tags: [real analysis]
---

### 2.1.4 - Real Analysis: Royden

A set function $c$, defined on all subsets of $\mathbb{R}$, is defined as follows. Define $c(E)$ to be $\infty$ if $E$ has infintely many members and $c(E)$ to be equal to the number of elements in $E$ if $E$ is finite; define $c(\emptyset)=0$. Show that $c$ is a countably additive and translation invariant set function. This set function is called the **counting measure**. 

***Proof:***

First, we show that $c$ is countably additive. Let $\{E_k\}_{k=1}^{\infty}$ be a collection of nonempty (empty subsets will not affect the measure), pairwise disjoint subsets of $\mathbb{R}$. Note that 

$$U = \bigcup_{k=1}^{\infty}E_k$$

has infinitely many members, so $c(U) = \infty$ regardless of the finiteness of each $E_k$. Hence, 

$$
\begin{aligned}
\sum_{k=1}^{\infty}c(E_k) &= \sum_{k=1}^{\infty}|E_k| \\
                          &= \infty \\
                          &= c(U)
\end{aligned}
$$

Next, consider a finite collection of nonempty, pairiwise disjoint subsets. It suffices to consider to two, say, $E_1$ and $E_2$. If both are finite, then, we have

$$
\begin{aligned}
c(E_1) + c(E_2) &= |E_1| + |E_2| \\
                &= |E_1 \cup E_2| \\
                &= c(E_1 \cup E_2)
\end{aligned}
$$

Without loss of generality, suppose that $E_1$ has infinitely many members. Then, 

$$
\begin{aligned}
c(E_1) + c(E_2) &= \infty \\
                &= c(E_1 \cup E_2)
\end{aligned}
$$

Hence, $c$ is countably additive. Next, we show that $c$ is translation invariant. Suppose that $E \subset \mathbb{R}$ has finitely many members and let $a \in \mathbb{R}$. Since $a$ only translates each member of $E$, we have that the cardinality is unchanged:

$$c(E + a) = |E| = c(E)$$

Similarly, if $E$ has infinitely many members, then

$$c(E+a) = \infty = c(E)$$

Therefore, $c$ is also translation invariant. 